Frontmatter {.unnumbered}
===========

### Abstract {.unnumbered}

Technologies including PCs, smartphones, and cloud computing have transformed the world: In our daily lives we interact with many businesses and public services who (to reduce costs) increasingly seek to rely on data collection and processing rather than face-to-face user interactions to inform their decisions. This creates an _imbalance of power_ between those who hold data and the individuals about whom data is stored, who cannot easily see their personal data or how it is used. This _Digital Civics_ PhD research explores, from a pragmatic, constructivist perspective, the topic of _Human Data Relations_. Through two qualitative case studies across public and private sectors, it answers the question, _"What relationship do people need with their personal data?"_. Case Study One focuses on _Early Help_ social care: Through four workshops with supported families, social workers and staff, a deep understanding of the individual perspective on civic personal data use is established. _Shared data interaction_ is explored as a means to shift the balance of power towards the individual while maintaining an effective care relationship. Case Study Two is a three-month study exploring 10 participants' experience of using _GDPR data access rights_ to view their own data, resulting in insights into individual needs and the challenges of data-centric service relationships, and recommendations for improvement of policies and practices. With reference to literature from the fields of _Personal Information Management_, _Human Data Interaction_ and _MyData_ personal data ecosystems, these case studies contribute to a unified understanding of _six core needs_ that people have in Human Data Relations. In the final chapter, the thesis discusses the _practical pursuit_ of these goals, drawing on first-hand knowledge acquired from expert participation in industrial research projects at BBC R&D and Hestia.ai/SITRA, providing a workable _roadmap for future research and innovation_.
